Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we're going to talk about the neuroscience of fear.
We are also going to talk about trauma
and post-traumatic stress disorders.
The neuroscience of fear has a long history in biology
and in the field of psychology.
However, I think it's fair to say that in the last 10 years,
the field of neuroscience has shed light
on not just the neural circuits,
meaning the areas of the brain
that control the fear response and the ways that it does it,
but some important ways to extinguish fears
using behavioral therapies, drug therapies,
and what we call brain-machine interfaces.
Today, we are going to talk about all of those,
and you are going to come away
with both an understanding of the biology of fear
and trauma, as well as many practical tools
to confront fear and trauma.
In fact, we are going to discuss
one very recently published study
in which five minutes a day of deliberate exposure to stress
was shown to alleviate longstanding depressive
and fear-related symptoms.
We will get into the details of that study
and the protocol that emerges from that study
a little later in the podcast,
but it stands as a really important,
somewhat counterintuitive example
of how stress itself can be used to combat fear.
To give you a sense of where we are going,
I'll just lay out the framework for today's podcast.
First, I'm going to teach you
about the biology of fear and trauma,
literally the cells and circuits and connections in the body
and chemicals in the body
that give rise to the so-called fear response,
and why sometimes, but not always,
fear can turn into trauma.
I will also describe the biology of how fear is unlearned,
or what we call extinguished,
and there too, you're going to get some serious surprises.
You're going to learn, for instance,
that we can't just eliminate fears,
we actually have to replace fears with a new positive event.
And again, there are tools with which to do that,
and I will teach you those tools today.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been taking Athletic Greens every day since 2012,
so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started taking Athletic Greens,
and the reason I still take Athletic Greens,
is that it covers all of my vitamin mineral
and probiotic needs.
Nowadays, there's a lot of data out there
pointing to the fact that a healthy gut microbiome,
literally little microbes that live in our gut
that are good for us,
is important to support our immune system,
our nervous system, our endocrine system,
and various aspects of our immediate and long-term health.
With Athletic Greens,
I get all the vitamins and minerals that I need,
plus the probiotics ensure a healthy gut microbiome.
It also tastes really good.
I mix mine up with some water, a little bit of lemon juice.
I'll have that early in the day,
and sometimes a second time later in the day as well.
It's compatible with intermittent fasting.
It's compatible with vegan diets, with keto diets,
and essentially every diet
that you could possibly imagine out there.
It's also filled with adaptogens for recovery.
It has digestive enzymes for gut health,
and it has a number of other things
that support the immune system.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman
to claim their special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs
that make it really easy to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road,
and they'll give you a year's supply of vitamin D3K2.
There's now a lot of evidence that vitamin D3
supports a huge number of metabolic factors,
immune system factors, endocrine factors.
Basically, we need vitamin D3.
We can get it from the sun,
but many people are deficient in vitamin D3
even if they are getting
what they think is sufficient sunlight.
And K2 is important for cardiovascular health.
So again, if you go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman,
you can claim their special offer,
the five free travel packs,
plus the year supply of vitamin D3K2.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer
in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed from a quality blood test.
And now with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also get information
about how your specific genes are impacting
your immediate and long-term health.
Now, a problem with a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there is you get the numbers back,
but you don't know what to do with those numbers.
With Inside Tracker, they make it very simple
to figure out what to do to bring those numbers
into the ranges that are right for you.
They have a dashboard that's very easy to use.
You can see the numbers from your blood and or DNA tests,
and it will point to specific lifestyle factors,
nutritional factors, as well as supplementation,
maybe even prescription factors that would be right
for you to bring the numbers into range
that are ideal for your immediate
and long-term health goals.
Another feature that Inside Tracker has
is their inner age test.
This test shows you what your biological age is
and compares that to your chronological age
and what you can do to improve your biological age,
which of course is the important number.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Helix Sleep.
Helix Sleep makes mattresses and pillows
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've been sleeping on a Helix mattress
for close to a year now,
and it's the best sleep that I've ever had.
Helix has a quiz that takes about two minutes to complete
and matches your body type and sleep preferences
to the perfect mattress for you.
Some people sleep on their side,
some people sleep on their back,
some people sleep on their stomach,
some people run hot, some people run cold,
some people don't know which part of their body
they sleep on.
You take this test, it's very brief, two minutes,
and after that test, Helix will match you
to the mattress that's ideal for you.
I matched to the so-called DUSK mattress
because I wanted a mattress that wasn't too firm,
not too soft, and I like to sleep kind of,
sort of on my stomach
in kind of a crawling soldier position.
I just, that seems to be always how I wake up
in the morning anyway.
So if you're interested in upgrading your mattress,
go to helixsleep.com slash Huberman,
take their two-minute sleep quiz,
and they'll match you to a customized mattress,
and you'll get up to $200 off all mattress orders,
and you'll get two free pillows.
Again, if you're interested,
please go to helixsleep.com slash Huberman
for up to $200 off and two free pillows.
So what is fear?
Well, fear falls into a category of nervous system phenomenon
that we can reliably call an emotion,
and it is hotly debated nowadays,
and it's been hotly debated really for centuries
what an emotion is and what an emotion isn't.
Now, that's not a debate that I want to get into today.
I think it's fair to say that emotions include responses
within our body, quickening of heart rate,
changes in blood flow,
things that we experience as a warming
or a cooling of our skin,
but that there's also a cognitive component.
There are thoughts, there are memories.
There's all sorts of stuff that goes on in our mind
and in our body that together we call an emotion,
and there's a vast amount of interest
and literature devoted to trying to understand
how many different emotions there are,
how different people experience emotions,
and that's certainly a topic that we will embrace
in a future podcast episode.
But today, I just want to talk about fear as a response,
because when we talk about fear as a physiological response
and as a cognitive response,
then we can get down to some very concrete mechanisms
and some very concrete and practical tools
that can be used to deal with fear when fear is not wanted.
So let's talk first about what fear isn't.
Most people are familiar with stress,
both as a concept and as an experience.
Stress is a physiological response.
It involves quickening of the heart rate,
typically quickening of breathing,
blood flow getting shuttled to certain areas
of the brain and body and not to others.
It can create a hypervigilance or an awareness.
Typically, that awareness is narrower,
literally narrower in space,
like a soda straw view of the world,
than when we are relaxed.
And it is fair to say that we cannot have fear
without having several, if not all of the elements
of the stress response.
However, we can have stress without having fear.
Likewise, people are familiar with the phrase,
or the word, rather, anxiety.
Anxiety tends to be stress about some future event,
although it can mean other things as well.
We can't really have fear without seeing or observing
or experiencing some of the elements of anxiety,
but we can have anxiety without having fear.
So what you're starting to realize is that fear is built up
from certain basic elements that include stress and anxiety.
And then there is trauma.
And trauma also requires a specific,
what we will call operational definition.
An operational definition is just a definition
that allows us to have a conversation
because we both agree on, or mostly agree on,
what the meaning of a given word is.
It makes conversations much easier.
In fact, I would argue,
if we all had operational definitions
for more things in the world,
that there would be fewer misunderstandings and arguments,
and we'd all move a lot further as a species.
But that's another topic entirely.
The operational definition of trauma
is that some fear took place,
which of course includes stress and anxiety,
and that fear somehow gets embedded
or activated in our nervous system
such that it shows up at times when it's maladaptive,
meaning that fear doesn't serve us well,
and it gets reactivated at various times.
Like when you first wake up in the morning,
if you're not in the presence of something that scared you,
but you suddenly have what feels like a panic attack
and you're in deep fear,
well, that's post-traumatic stress.
That's post-traumatic fear.
So I don't want to get bogged down
too much in the nomenclature,
but what I'm doing here is building up
a sort of a series of layers
where stress and anxiety form the foundation
of what we're calling fear and trauma.
And then there are other phrases out there
that we would be remiss if we didn't mention
things like phobias and panic attacks.
Panic attacks are the experience of extreme fear,
but without any fear-inducing stimulus.
So it's kind of like trauma.
And a phobia tends to be extreme fear
of something specific, fear of spiders,
fear of heights, fear of flying, fear of dying,
these kinds of things, okay?
The reason for laying all that out there
is not to create a word soup to confuse us.
Rather, it is to simplify the issue
because now that we acknowledge
that there are many different phrases
to describe this thing that we call fear
and then related phenomenon,
we can start to just focus on two of these issues,
fear and trauma, as it relates
to specific biological processes,
specific cognitive processes,
and we can start to dissect how fears are formed,
how fears are unformed,
and how new memories can come
to replace previously fearful experiences.
So in this effort to establish a common language
around fear and trauma,
I want to point out autonomic arousal.
Autonomic arousal relates to this aspect
of our nervous system
that we call the autonomic nervous system.
Autonomic means automatic.
That's somewhat of a misnomer
because there are aspects of your autonomic nervous system
that you can control,
but your autonomic nervous system
controls things like digestion,
urination, sexual behavior, stress.
When you want to be awake,
when you want to be asleep,
it basically has two branches to it,
two branches meaning two different systems.
One is the so-called sympathetic autonomic nervous system.
It has nothing to do with sympathy.
It has everything to do with increasing alertness.
Think of the sympathetic nervous system
as the alertness nervous system.
It's what ramps up your levels of alertness,
ramps up your levels of vigilance.
Think about it as the accelerator
on your alertness and attention.
The other branch of the autonomic nervous system
is the so-called parasympathetic branch
of the autonomic nervous system.
I know that's a mouthful.
The parasympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous system
are the cells and neurons and chemicals
and other aspects of your brain and body
that are involved in the calming nervous system.
So sympathetic is alerting, parasympathetic is calming,
and it acts as sort of a seesaw
to adjust your overall level of alertness.
So for instance, right now I'm alert,
but I feel pretty calm.
I'm not ready to go to sleep or anything like that.
I don't feel like I need a nap.
I'm alert, but I'm calm.
I'm not in a state of stress or panic.
So that seesaw we could imagine is more or less level.
Maybe it's tilted up a little bit
to the side of increased sympathetic or alertness
rather than parasympathetic because I feel wide awake.
If I were sleepy, the opposite would be true.
The parasympathetic side would be increased
relative to the sympathetic side.
There are many different aspects
to the autonomic nervous system,
but one of the main aspects is an aspect
that's going to come up again and again and again today.
It's very important that you understand what it is.
It's called the HPA axis.
The HPA axis stands
for hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis.
The hypothalamus is a collection of neurons.
It's an area of your brain, real estate,
that's deep in the brain, at the base of the brain,
that contains many, many different areas
that control things like temperature and desire to have sex,
desire to eat, thirst.
It also controls the desire to not mate, have sex,
not eat, not drink more water or any other type of fluid.
So it has accelerators and breaks in there as well.
The hypothalamus connects to the so-called pituitary.
The pituitary lives close to the roof of your mouth.
It releases hormones into your bloodstream.
And so the hypothalamus has this ability
to trigger the release or prevent the release
of particular hormones like cortisol
or the hormones that go stimulate ovaries
to produce estrogen or testes to produce testosterone
or adrenals to produce adrenaline.
And speaking of the adrenals,
that A in the HPA are the adrenals.
You have two glands that sit above your kidneys
in your lower back.
They receive signals by way of nerve cells, neurons,
and by way of hormones and other things released
from the brain and elsewhere in the body.
And they release different hormones
and other types of chemicals into the body.
And the two main ones that you need to know
about today are adrenaline,
also called epinephrine, and cortisol.
Both of those are so-called stress hormones,
but they're not always involved in stress.
They're also involved in waking up in the morning
when you, excuse me, when you rise from sleep.
And so this HPA axis should be thought of
in the following way.
The HPA axis includes a piece of the brain,
the hypothalamus, the pituitary, and the adrenal.
So it's a beautiful three-part system
that can use your brain to alert or wake up your body
and prepare it for action.
And it can do that in the short term
by triggering the release of hormones and chemicals
that make you alert and ready to go right away.
And by triggering the release of neurotransmitters
and hormones and other chemicals
that give that alertness a very long tail,
a very long latency before it shuts off.
And that's important because one of the hallmarks of fear
and one of the hallmarks of trauma
is that they involve fear responses that are long lasting.
Even if those fearful events,
the events in the world that trigger the HPA axis
can be very brief,
like a car that almost hits you as you step off the curb
or something, a gunshot that goes off suddenly,
and it's just a very quick, like 500 millisecond
or one second event,
the fear response can reverberate through your system
because the chemicals that are involved in this HPA axis
have a fast component and a longer lasting component.
And the longer lasting component can actually change
not just the connections of different areas of the brain
and the way that our organs work,
like our heart and the way that we breathe,
it actually can feed back to the brain
and literally control gene expression,
which can take many days and build out new circuits
and new chemicals that can embed fear in our brain and body.
And that might sound very depressing,
but there's a reason and there's an adaptive reason
why there's this slow and fast phase of the HPA axis
and the fear response.
And fortunately, that gene expression
and the long arc of the fear response,
the way it kind of lives in our system,
kind of like a phantom in some ways,
can also be leveraged to undo the fear response,
to extinguish the fear response and replace it
with non-fearful associations.
So let's dig a little deeper into the neural circuits
and biology of fear, because in doing that,
we can start to reveal the logic of how to attack fear
if that's the goal.
We can't really have a discussion about fear
without discussing the famous amygdala.
Famous because I think most people by now
have heard of the amygdala.
Amygdala means almond, it's an almond-shaped structure
on both sides of the brain.
So you have one on the right side of your brain
and one on the left side of your brain.
The amygdala is part of what we can call the threat reflex.
And this is very important to conceptualize fear
as including a reflex.
So much as you have reflexes that cause you
to lift your foot up if you are to step on something sharp,
you literally have a reflex within your spinal cord
that causes you to lift up one foot
and extend the other one toward the ground,
believe it or not.
You always think that you step on something sharp,
you pull your foot up,
but you actually step on something sharp,
you pull your foot up and in pulling it up,
there's another reflex that's activated
that as you extend your other leg
so that you don't fall over.
Similarly, in the process of experiencing fear,
you have a reflex for particular events
in your brain and body.
And that reflex involves things like
quickening of your heart rate, hypervigilance,
your attentional systems pop on,
increased ability to access energy stores
for movement and thought and so forth.
But just like that step on the tack reflex example,
all of the neural circuits that are associated
with being calm, with being able to go to sleep,
with being able to visualize the full picture
of your environment, literally,
to see your entire environment
or to hear other things around you,
all of those get shut down
when the so-called threat reflex gets activated.
And the amygdala is part of the threat reflex,
so much so that we can really say
that it's the final common pathway
through which the threat reflex flows.
In other words, the amygdala is essential
for the threat response.
But the threat reflex and the threat response
is kind of a dumb response.
It's not a sophisticated thing.
It's very generic.
And this is also a very important point.
One of the beauties of the fear system
is that it's very generalizable.
It's not designed for you to be afraid of any one thing.
Sure, there are some debates
and probably some good data out there
that support the fact that human babies are innately,
meaning it requires no learning,
innately afraid of certain things
like heights or snakes or spiders.
There's debate about this,
and it depends on the quality of the experiment, et cetera.
But the real capacity of the fear system
is that we can become afraid of anything
provided that this threat system is activated
in conjunction with some external experience.
So the way I'd like you to think about the amygdala
is not as a fear center,
but that it's a critical component of the threat reflex.
I'd like you to also internalize the idea
that the threat reflex involves
this activation of certain systems
and suppression of all the systems for calming,
the parasympathetic system.
And now I'm going to describe the way
that information flows into
and through this threat reflex.
And in doing that, it will reveal how specific things,
like a spider, like a snake, like a physical trauma,
like a car accident, like a fear of public speaking,
whatever happens to scare you or scare somebody,
how that gets attached to this reflex.
Because this reflex is very generic.
It doesn't really know what to be afraid of.
It only knows how to create the sensation,
this internal landscape that we think of as fear.
So while the amygdala might look like an almond,
it's actually part of a much bigger complex
or collection of neurons called the amygdaloid complex.
That complex has anywhere from 12 to 14 areas,
depending on which neuroanatomist is naming things
and carving it up.
In neuroscience and in much of biology,
we like to joke that there are lumpers
and there are splitters.
So some people like to draw boundaries
between every little distinct difference
and say, oh, that's a separate area
and other people are lumpers.
And they say, well, listen, why complicate things?
Let's lump those together.
I'm neither a lumper nor a splitter.
I'm somewhere in between.
I think the number 12 is a good number
in terms of the number of different areas of the amygdala.
Why is that important to us?
Well, it turns out that the amygdala
is not just a area for threat.
It's an area for generating threat reflexes
that integrates lots of different types of information.
So for those of you that want to know,
I'm going to give you some names, some nomenclature.
For those of you that don't,
you can tune out for this,
but basically information from our memory systems,
like the hippocampus and from our sensory systems,
our eyes, our ears, our nose, our mouth, et cetera.
So taste information, vision, auditory information,
touch, et cetera, flow into the so-called lateral portion
of the amygdala or the amygdala complex.
It flows into the lateral portion
and then there are multiple outputs from the amygdala.
And this is where things get particularly interesting
because the outputs of the amygdala
have a lot of different areas,
but there are two main pathways.
One involves the hypothalamus,
which you heard about before,
this collection of neurons that control
a lot of our primitive drives for sex,
for food, for thirst, and for warmth, et cetera.
And it also feeds out to our adrenals,
those glands that you learned about a few minutes ago
to create a sense of alertness and action.
It also feeds out.
What I mean by feeds out, by the way,
is there are neurons that send wires,
we call those wires axons connections,
where they can release chemicals
and trigger the activation of different brain areas.
So it feeds out to other brain areas such as the PAG.
PAG is very interesting for our discussion today.
It's the periaqueductal gray.
The periaqueductal gray contains neurons
that can trigger freezing, can trigger the,
some people talk about the fawning response,
which is kind of an appeasing response to traumatic events,
but some people outright freeze in response to fear, right?
We've heard of fight or flight,
and indeed the pathway that I'm describing
can create a sense of fight and cause people
to want to lean in in an aggressive way
to combat things that they're afraid of,
or flight to run away, essentially to avoid by mobilizing
the thing that they feel they're threatened by.
Now, even in the absence of some threat,
somebody that has, say, a fear of public speaking
might hesitate or move away from a podium
or hesitate or move away from raising their hand,
if raising their hand meant that they might be called on
and would be public speaking.
So there's fight and flight,
but there's also the freeze response.
And the freeze response is controlled
by a number of brain centers,
but the periaqueductal gray, the PAG,
is central for this freeze response.
And neurons there also create
what are called endogenous opioids.
Many of you have heard of the opioid crisis,
which is a crisis of prescription medication
given out too broadly for people that don't need it,
who become addicted to opioids.
Those are exogenous opioids,
but endogenous opioids are chemicals released from neurons
in the PAG and from elsewhere in the body
that give us a sense of numbing.
They actually numb us against pain.
And you can imagine why biology
would be organized this way.
A threat occurs or something that we perceive as a threat,
we're afraid of it, and a natural analgesic
is released into our body
because there's likely to be an interaction
that's very uncomfortable, that's physically uncomfortable.
So it's like we have our own endogenous release
of these opioids and that's occurring in the PAG.
The other area, and again,
sorry to litter the conversation
with these names of structures,
but some people seem to enjoy knowing these structures.
You're fine if you just understand what the structures do.
If you want to know the names, that's fine.
But the other structure is the locus coeruleus.
The locus coeruleus creates a sense of arousal
by releasing adrenaline, epinephrine,
and norepinephrine, a related chemical, into the brain.
So basically the activation of the amygdaloid complex
could be from any number of different things,
a memory of something fearful,
an actual sensory experience of something that's fearful.
But then the fear response itself is taking part
because of the threat reflex gets activated.
And that threat reflex then sends a whole set
of other functions into action,
freezing, activation of the adrenals,
activation of locus coeruleus for arousal and alertness,
activation of this endogenous pain system
or anti-pain system in the PAG.
That's one pathway out of the amygdala.
The other pathway out of the amygdala
is to a very interesting area
that typically is associated with reward and even addiction.
So this might come as a surprise to many of you.
In fact, it came as a surprise to me.
I remember when these data were published,
but the amygdaloid complex actually projects to areas
of the dopamine system, the so-called nucleus accumbens,
the mesolimbic reward pathway.
For those of you that want to look that up
or that remember from the dopamine episodes,
we have pathways in our brain
that are associated with pursuit, motivation and reward.
And the neuromodulator dopamine is largely responsible
for that feeling of craving, pursuit and reward.
And this threat center is actually able to communicate with
and activate the dopamine system.
And later you will realize why that is very important
and why you can leverage the dopamine system
in order to wire in new memories to replace fearful ones.
So I've been hitting you with a lot of names of things,
but for the moment,
even if you're interested in all the neuroscience names
and structures and so forth,
I'd like you to just conceptualize
that you have a circuit in your brain,
meaning a set of cells and connections
that are arranged in the following way.
You have a threat reflex
that can be activated at any time, very easily,
but what activates that threat reflex
can depend on two things.
One are prior memories coming from brain areas
that are involved in storage of memories,
or it can be immediate experiences.
Things are happening in the now, okay?
So where's something fearful to happen right now?
Your threat reflex could be activated.
Were you to remember something very scary
that happened to you in the past?
Your threat reflex could be activated.
And that threat reflex circuit has two major outputs.
One of the major outputs is to areas
that are involved in the threat response,
freezing, pain management, and alertness.
And the other major output is to areas involved
in reward, motivation, and reinforcement, okay?
There's a fourth component,
and I promise this is the last component
that we need to put into this picture
of the neural circuits for fear.
And this is a circuit that involves an area of the brain
called the prefrontal cortex and some of its subdivisions,
so literally in the front.
And it's involved in what we call top-down processing.
Top-down processing is the way that your prefrontal cortex
and other areas of the brain can control
or suppress a reflex, okay?
A good example of this would be the step on the tack example
that I gave before.
So when you step on a tack,
you immediately pull up your foot
and you extend the other leg.
That's the reflex that prevents you from injuring yourself
and from falling over.
However, if you wanted, not that you would want to,
but if you wanted, you could, for instance,
place your foot onto a tack
and decide not to pull your foot away.
It would be difficult.
And again, I don't recommend that you do that,
but you could override that reflex, okay?
There are other examples of reflexes,
like, for instance, getting into cold water.
Most people will start to huddle their body.
Most people won't want to get into the cold water.
Many people will jump out.
But all of that is reflexive.
And should you want to,
you could override that reflex through top-down processing.
You could tell yourself,
oh, I heard on a previous Huberman Lab podcast
or on an Instagram post that cold water exposure
can be beneficial for metabolism and resilience, et cetera,
and indeed it can.
And you can decide to get into the water
and to stretch out your body, not to huddle,
and you can fight those reflexes, okay?
The fighting of reflex is carried out
through top-down processing,
largely through the prefrontal cortex.
You provide a narrative.
You tell yourself, I want to do this, or I should do this,
or even though I don't want to, I'm going to do it anyway.
So top-down processing is not just
for getting into cold water.
And it certainly isn't for overriding reflexes
that can damage us like stepping on the tack example.
It is the way in which we can override
any number of internal reflexes,
including the threat reflex.
And the way that we do that is by giving a new story
or a new narrative to this experience that we call threat.
And you know the threat response.
The threat response is quickening of the heart rate,
quickening of the breathing.
We don't generally like the feeling of adrenaline
in our system.
A lot of people are so-called adrenaline junkies,
and they get a mixture of dopamine and adrenaline
from certain high-intensity events.
I confess in previous aspects of my life,
I've tended to like adrenaline.
I don't think I was at the extreme of thrill-seeking,
but I'm somebody that, for instance, I tend to like.
I like roller coasters.
I've done various things where I'm familiar with
and I enjoy the sensation of adrenaline in my body,
but I enjoy it because of the alertness that it brings
and the hyperacuity that it brings.
Many people don't feel that way.
In fact, most people don't like the sensation
of a lot of adrenaline in their system.
It makes them feel very uncomfortable and out of control.
We will do an entire episode about adrenaline
and adrenaline junkies and adrenaline aversives
in the future, but the threat reflex
inevitably involves the release of adrenaline
into the system.
And then it becomes a question of whether or not
you remain still, move forward, or retreat
from that adrenaline experience.
And when I say the adrenaline experience,
I mean the threat reflex.
So this fourth component of fear is really our ability
to attach narrative, to attach meaning,
and to attach purpose to what is,
by all accounts and purposes, a generic response.
There's no negotiating what fear feels like.
There's only negotiating what it means.
There's only negotiating whether or not you persist,
whether or not you pause, or whether or not you retreat.
So this is usually the point in the podcast
where I think people start asking,
okay, well, there's the biology, there's the mechanism,
there's the logic, how do I eliminate fear?
Well, it's not quite that simple,
although by understanding the logic and the mechanisms
by which these circuits are built,
we can eventually get to that place.
I do want to plant a flag around a particular type of tool
or a logical framework around a particular set of tools,
rather, that we are going to build out through this episode.
And based on what you now know,
that the threat reflex gets input and it has outputs,
and it's subject to these top-down processing events,
these narratives, you should be asking yourself,
what sort of narrative should I apply to eliminate fear?
Well, first let's take a step back
and it just acknowledged the reality,
which is that fear is, in some cases, an adaptive response.
We don't want people eliminating fears
that can get them injured or killed, right?
The reason that the fear threat response
and reflex exists at all is to help us from dying,
to help us from making really bad decisions.
It just so happens that a number of things happen to us
that are not lethal, that don't harm us,
but that harm us from the inside.
And I think that, and here I'm borrowing language
from an excellent researcher
who's done important work in this area at Harvard.
His name is Dr. Kerry Ressler.
He's both a medical doctor and a PhD, so an MD PhD.
He's the chief scientific officer at McLean Hospital.
He's a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School,
and he's done extensive and important work on fear.
I'm going to refer back to Dr. Ressler's work
several times during this podcast,
including important and super interesting work
on transgenerational passage of trauma.
He's a absolutely world-class biologist,
absolutely world-class clinician.
And Dr. Ressler has described fear before
as containing a historical component.
So it's not just about a readiness for things
that might injure us or kill us in the immediate circumstance
but also protecting us for the future
because of our important need and ability to anticipate.
And what he describes are memories as protective
or memories as dangerous.
Some memories, even if they evoke a sense of fear in us
are protective.
They protect us from making bad mistakes
that could get us injured or killed
or put us into really horrible circumstances.
Other memories are dangerous
because they create a sense in us of discomfort
and they tend to limit our behavior
in ways that are maladaptive,
that prevent us from having healthy relationships to others,
healthy job relationships,
healthy relationship to ourselves, frankly.
So this language of memories as protective
or memories as dangerous in the context of fear
is not something that I said,
it's really something that I lifted from Dr. Ressler
in one of his many impressive lectures.
And it's an important aspect of fear
because much of the fear system is a memory system.
It's designed to embed a memory
of certain previous experiences in us
such that the threat reflex is activated
in the anticipation of what might happen, okay?
So let's talk for a second about how certain memories
get attached to this fear system.
And this brings us to a beautiful
and indeed Nobel prize-winning aspect
of biology and physiology,
which is Pavlovian conditioning.
Many of you are probably familiar with Pavlov's dogs
and the famous Pavlovian conditioning experiments.
They go something like this.
You know, if you and Pavlov did these experiments
and ring a bell, a dog doesn't do much
in response to a bell, it might attend to it,
but it doesn't salivate typically in response to the bell.
However, if you pair the ringing of a bell
with a presentation of food enough times,
the dog will salivate in response to the food.
Eventually you take away the food,
you just ring the bell and the dog will salivate
in response to the bell, okay?
So in the context of so-called Pavlovian conditioning,
these things have names like conditioned stimulus
and unconditioned stimulus and responses.
People often get these mixed up
and it can be a little confusing,
but I'm just going to make it really simple for you.
The unconditioned stimulus is the thing
that evokes a response unconditionally.
So food is the unconditioned stimulus
in the example I just gave.
A foot shock or a loud bang
would be the unconditioned stimulus in,
for instance, an experiment geared toward exploring fear.
That unconditioned stimulus is unconditional.
It unconditionally evokes a startle
or in the case of food, salivating.
The bell in the previous example
is what we call the conditioned stimulus
or the conditioning stimulus.
Sometimes people mix these up.
The conditioned stimulus is paired with the thing
that naturally creates a response.
And then eventually the conditioned stimulus
creates the response itself.
You might think, well,
that just seems endlessly boring and simple,
but this is actually the way that our fear systems work.
Except unlike Pavlov's dogs,
you don't need many, many pairings
of a bell with some unconditioned stimulus
in order to get a response.
You can get what's called one trial learning.
And in this circuit that involves the amygdala,
the threat reflex, and all this other stuff
that I was talking about earlier,
the system is set up for learning.
It's set up to create memories and to anticipate problems.
It's a very good system
because it was designed to keep us safe.
And so the way to think about this is that for many people,
one intense experience, one burn, one bad breakup,
one bad experience public speaking,
one bad experience with somebody's pet snake
or whatever it happens to be
can cause intense fear in the moment,
a long reverberatory experience of fear,
like trouble sleeping that night and the following night,
memories of the experience that are troubling,
physiological responses that are troubling.
Essentially, it gets wired in as a fear with one trial,
which is quite different
than the other forms of neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity, of course,
just being the nervous system's ability to change
in response to experience.
Other forms of neuroplasticity like learning a language,
learning music, learning math, those take a while.
We don't generally get one trial learning
to positive or neutral experiences.
We get one trial learning to negative experiences.
So there's this asymmetry in how we're wired.
So now you should understand how classical conditioning,
as it's called, occurs.
You go to give a piano recital as a kid,
you sit down and you freeze up
and it's horribly embarrassing.
And even if you just freeze up for a few seconds,
the heart rate increase and the perspiring, the sweating,
and the shame that you feel
leads you to want to avoid playing instruments
or public displays of performances
for a long period of time
unless you do something to overcome it.
That's one trial learning.
Some people, it tends to be more
an accumulation of experiences.
They have a bad relationship that lasts an entire summer,
an entire year, or God forbid, a decade.
And then they have what they feel
is kind of a general sense of fear
about closeness to others and attachment.
These are common fears that people experience.
Fears can be in the short term,
fears can be in the long term,
they can be in the medium term.
Again, the fear system is very generic.
It's wired to include memories that are very acute,
that happen within a moment,
or that include many, many events and long periods of time
that kind of funnel into a general sense
of relationships are bad,
or this particular city or location is bad.
So there's a key, what we call temporal component.
There's a component of the fear system
being able to batch many events in time
and create one specific fear,
or take one very specific isolated incident
that happened very briefly
and create one very large general sense of fears.
And I'll give an example of the latter
just to kind of flesh this out a little bit.
I had a friend come visit me in San Francisco some years ago
and their car got broken into,
unfortunately, a frequent occurrence in San Francisco
and in the middle of the day,
never leave anything in your car in San Francisco.
They'll break in in the middle of the day, doesn't matter.
Police can be having coffee right there in front of them.
They'll still do it for reasons we could discuss.
This is a problem.
They got their belongings taken
and they decided they were never coming back
to San Francisco.
This was an isolated incident that forever colored
their view of the city, which I, you know, frankly,
understanding the fear system, I can understand.
We can have isolated incidents that wick out
to broad decisions about entire places,
or we can have many experiences
that funnel into very specific isolated fears
about particular circumstances, places, and things.
So I like to think that by now
you have a pretty good understanding
of the circuits that underlie the threat reflex,
the fear response, and how we have top-down control,
meaning we can attach a narrative to the fear response,
and that the fear response can be learned
in association with particular events, okay?
I haven't really talked about how the learning occurs,
and so I just want to take a moment and describe that
because it leads right into our discussion
about how to eliminate fears,
and indeed how to replace fears
with more positive experiences.
There's a process in our nervous system
that we call neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity broadly defined
is the nervous system's ability
to change in response to experience,
but at a cellular level,
that occurs through a couple of different mechanisms.
One of the main mechanisms
is something called long-term potentiation.
Long-term potentiation involves the strengthening
of particular connections between neurons,
the connection sites between neurons we call synapses.
Actually, technically synapses are the gaps
between those connections,
but nonetheless, synapses are the point of communication
between neurons, and those can be strengthened
so that certain neurons can talk to other neurons
more robustly than they happened to before.
And anytime we talk about a particular event,
the car, the snake, the public speaking,
the trauma, the horrible experience
wiring into the fear system,
what we're talking about is a change in synaptic strengths.
We're talking about neurons that previously
did not communicate well, communicating very well.
It's like going from a old school dial-up connection
or even an old school telephone connection
or Morse code connection of communication
to high-speed ethernet, okay, to a 5G connection.
It gets faster, it gets more robust,
and it's very, very clear.
That's what happens when you get long-term potentiation.
And long-term potentiation
involves a couple of cellular mechanisms
that are going to be relevant to our discussion
about treatments to undo fear.
And I'll just throw out a couple of the names
of some of those cellular elements right now.
The main one is the so-called NMDA receptor,
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.
And what this is is this is a little docking site,
like a little parking slot on a neuron.
And when a neuron gets activated very strongly,
like from an intense event, in the example of my friend,
the intense event almost certainly activated NMDA receptors
related to their concept of protecting their property
in their cars, the break into their car
caused the NMDA receptor to be activated.
Normally that NMDA receptor is not easily activated.
And when it is activated, it sets off a cascade,
a series of signals within those neurons
that change those neurons.
It changes the genes they express.
It shuttles more parking spots to the surface of those cells
so that the communication to those cells becomes easier.
It becomes faster.
And so the way to think about the NMDA receptor
is it's used sometimes for normal things
that we do every day, making cups of coffee
and things like that, but it's often used for learning.
It's used for creating new associations
in our nervous system.
And so the activation of the NMDA receptor and LTP,
and it involves some other things that you may have heard of
like brain-derived nootropic factors and calcium entry,
things that we can leave for a discussion for a future time,
but basically a whole cascade of events happen within cells
that then make just even the mere thought of something
or somebody or some event that happened
able to activate that threat reflex, okay?
So long-term potentiation is one of the main mechanisms
by which we take formally innocuous or irrelevant events
and we make them scary.
We make them traumatic.
Our neurons have mechanisms to do this.
Now, fortunately, the NMDA receptor
and long-term potentiation
can also run the whole system in reverse.
You can get what's called long-term depression,
and that doesn't have anything to do
with the depression associated with low mood.
What we're talking about is a weakening of connections.
You can go from having a very high-speed ethernet connection
between neurons, so to speak,
to a connection that's more like Morse code
or is like a poor dial-up connection, a really weak signal.
And that's what's happening when you extinguish a fear,
when you unlearn a fear.
So now I'd like to talk about therapies
that are carried out in humans
that allow fears to be undone,
that allow traumas to be reversed
such that people no longer feel bad
about a particular person, place, or thing,
either real interactions with that person, place, or thing,
or imagined interactions with that person, place, or thing.
That process, as I just mentioned,
also involves things like the NMDA receptor,
but rather than strengthening the connections,
the first thing that has to happen
is there needs to be a weakening of connections
that associate the person, place, or thing
with that threat reflex.
Subsequent to that, we will see,
there needs to be a strengthening of some new experience
that's positive, okay?
This is a key element of where we are headed.
Contrary to popular belief, it is not going to work
to simply extinguish a fear.
One needs to extinguish a fear and or trauma
and replace that fearful or traumatic memory or idea
or response with a positive response.
And this is something that's rarely discussed
both in the scientific literature,
but certainly in the general discussion
around fear and trauma.
There's this idea that we can extinguish fears,
we can rewire ourselves, we can eliminate our traumas,
and indeed we can, but that process has to involve
not just becoming comfortable
with a particular fearful event or trauma,
but also attaching a new positive experience
to that previously fearful or traumatic event.
There are a lot of different approaches out there
that are in clinical use to try and alleviate
fear and trauma and indeed PTSD,
post-traumatic stress disorder.
It might be surprising to learn that many
of those treatments, such as SSRIs,
the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors,
things like Prozac and Zoloft and similar
and other antidepressants, or things like benzodiazepines,
which are essentially like painkillers.
They create a elevation in certain transmitters
in the brain, like GABA among others.
They can have a pain relieving effect.
They are generally, however, considered anxiolytics.
They reduce anxiety.
And even antipsychotic drugs or beta blockers,
sometimes called adrenergic blockers,
drugs that are designed to prevent the heart
from beating too fast or to reduce blood pressure,
to reduce some elements of that
hypothalamic pituitary axis response
that we talked about earlier.
Many people experience some degree of relief
from the symptoms of anxiety and fear and PTSD
in taking these various compounds.
Indeed, that's why they're prescribed so broadly.
But you may find it interesting to note
that none of those current treatments
are based on the neurobiology of fear,
at least not directly, right?
People that take SSRIs oftentimes will experience
a reduction in anxiety.
It depends on the dosage and the individual, of course,
right, and you have to work with a doctor,
a psychiatrist to determine whether or not
they're right for you in the correct dosage
if they are right for you.
But that modulation of anxiety can indirectly
reduce the likelihood that one will have a panic attack
or experience a fear, an intense experience of fear,
a reliving of a trauma.
But the SSRIs themselves are not plugging
into some specific mechanism related
to how fear comes about in the system.
It's an indirect support.
That's important because if the goal of modern psychiatry
and the goal of modern biology
is to provide mechanistic understanding
that leads to treatments,
we need to think about what are the sorts of treatments
that tap into the very fear circuits
that we described before?
The fact that there are memories attached
to a generic threat reflex and response,
and the threat reflex response can be linked up
with the dopamine system and can be linked up
with other systems that are involved in pain relief
and anxiety and so forth.
And so that brings us to which treatments
are directly related to the fear circuitry
and the circuitry related to trauma.
And the primary one to begin with
is the so-called behavioral therapies.
Now, oftentimes we all wish, I think, from time to time,
that there's some specific pill that we can take,
or there's some machine or device
that we can plug our finger into,
or that we can put on a headset and all of a sudden
we just rewire our nervous system,
fear is gone, trauma is gone, but it doesn't work that way.
And when we think of language and narrative
as a tool to rewire our nervous system
in comparison to those kinds of ideas
about pills and machines and potions,
it starts to seem a little bit weak, right?
If we just think, oh, well,
how could talking actually change the way
that we respond to something?
But actually there are three forms of therapy
that purely through the use of language
have been shown to have very strong positive impact,
meaning reduced fears and traumas.
And those three are prolonged exposure therapy,
cognitive processing, or CPT,
and cognitive behavioral therapy.
And I'm not going to go into the entire literature
around prolonged exposure, cognitive processing,
and cognitive behavioral therapy,
but I will just illustrate the central theme
that allows them to work.
Now, remember that the circuit for fear,
the circuit for trauma involves this generic reflex,
and then there are those top-down elements
coming from the forebrain.
It's very clear because it's been measured
that if you look at the amount of anxiety,
the pure physiological anxiety response
of quickening of heart rate, blushing of the skin,
sometimes quaking of the hands, the experience of fear,
over time, when people recount or retell their trauma,
that the first time they do that,
especially when it's recounted in a lot of detail,
there's a tremendous anxiety response,
sometimes even as great or greater than the actual exposure
to the fearful event or trauma.
And obviously this is something that is done
with a clinician present
because it is very traumatic to the person.
They're literally reliving the trauma in full rich detail,
and they are encouraged to provide full rich detail.
They're often encouraged to speak in complete sentences,
to flesh out details about how they felt inside,
to flesh out details about their memories
going into this traumatic or fearful event,
going through it, and after,
really digging into all the nuance and contours
of these horrible experiences.
But what's remarkable is that in the second and the third
and the fourth retelling of these traumatic
or fearful events, that anxiety response
and the amount of the physiological response,
I should say that the amplitude
of the physiological response
becomes progressively diminished with each retelling.
Now, some of you might be saying, well, duh,
you tell a story enough times
that eventually it wears off.
Just like if you watch a movie enough times
and you hear the same joke enough times,
eventually it doesn't have the same impact.
But that needn't be the case, right?
You could imagine that this high amplitude anxiety response,
this high amplitude activation
of the sympathetic nervous system in retelling
would actually create a even deeper
routed fear response and trauma,
but that's not what happens.
And every clinician I spoke to in anticipation
of this episode, which include clinical psychologists,
psychiatrists, and people who actually work
on the fear system at a biological level,
said the exact same thing,
which is that a detailed recounting
of the traumatic and fearful events is absolutely essential
in order to get the positive effects of prolonged exposure,
cognitive processing, and cognitive behavioral therapy.
Again, this has to be done with the appropriate support.
This isn't something that should be taken lightly
because as we've mentioned before,
the fear response can have a very long lasting
contour to it.
People can sometimes have trouble sleeping for days and days
and afterwards we'll talk about sleep in a little bit,
but the point is that the retelling is important.
And the idea here is to take what was a terrible
and extremely troubling,
meaning physiologically troubling,
psychologically troubling story,
and turn it into what is essentially a boring bad story.
It never really becomes a good story at this point
in the treatment process that we're describing.
So a terrible event is a terrible event, period,
but there's a way in which the retelling of that event
starts to uncouple the threat reflex from the narrative.
And with each successive retelling in detail
of these traumatic events, of these fearful events,
the threat reflex is activated at a progressively
lower and lower amplitude such that eventually
it just becomes a really bad, really boring story.
Now that's one part of the process of getting over a fear.
It's what we call fear extinction.
And we can bring ourselves back to our earlier example
of Pavlovian conditioning because many studies
have been done both in animals and in humans
showing that, for instance, if you pair a tone,
you know, a bell or a buzzer with a foot shock
that an animal or a person will brace themselves
for the foot shock,
eventually you can just give the bell or tone
and the person will experience that same freezing up
or the same fight or flight or freeze response.
So you condition that.
But if you give the tone or the bell over and over
and there's no foot shock, there's no pain,
and in humans, this is sometimes done with foot shock,
sometimes believe it or not with mild burn,
there are even some studies, there's older studies,
you couldn't do those now, nor would you want to,
but eventually what happens is the tone,
the bell no longer evokes that response, okay?
So you see this as a reversal of the classical conditioning
and we call that reversal extinction.
So the retelling of this traumatic or fearful narrative,
excuse me, fearful narrative is essentially
an extinction process.
Now, how is this done?
One can do this in a therapist's office face-to-face,
that's sometimes done,
it's sometimes done in group type settings
where people actually stand up
or sit in front of a group, small or large,
and recount in detail their traumatic experience.
It's sometimes done by people writing out
the experience in detail.
And which one of these is most effective
isn't really clear, the literature points to the fact
that a feeling of trust, obviously,
between the patient and the clinician
or the person and the group is essential,
some people don't have access to because of finances
or other limitations to therapy of that sort,
in that case, journaling in detail
has been shown to be effective,
although, again, I want to caution people
about reactivating traumas without consideration
for the kinds of social support they might need
around that reactivation,
and we will talk a little bit later
about some of the chemicals involved in social support
and why those help extinguish fears.
So the thing to embed in your mind is that recognition
of the early traumatic or fearful event in detail
over and over is key to forming a new
non-traumatic association with that event or person.
So that's part one.
You need to diminish the old experience.
And when I say diminish,
I mean reduce the amplitude of the physiological response.
Now, this is just but one approach.
I'm going to talk about other approaches
to eliminating fear and trauma as we go forward.
But I want to emphasize that diminishing the amplitude
of the physiological response is the first step.
So it's like a clearing away of the association
between the person, place, or thing and that threat reflex.
But even after that's occurred,
there's an essential need to relearn a new narrative.
Why is there essential need to relearn a new narrative
or create a new association?
Well, that has to do with that fear reflex circuitry.
As you recall, there are outputs to areas of the brain
that are associated with dopamine release and reinforcement.
And that we now know offers the capacity
for these fear circuits and these circuits
that underlie trauma to be mapped onto new experiences
that are of positive association.
So I'm going to give a kind of basic example.
It's a kind of a silly example,
but I'm giving it as a template
for what could be any number of other different examples.
Example I'll give is let's say a kid is biking
to play soccer, soccer practice,
and they get into a bad car accident, okay?
Terrible thing to happen, but they survive, they recover.
And somehow, and we really don't know why
certain fear memories get wired in more broadly
or more narrowly.
Somehow this kid just doesn't even want to bicycle anymore.
And they actually don't even want to play sports.
And they actually just don't want to go anywhere.
They're kind of isolating
and not interacting with friends very much at all.
It's a pretty broad response.
It didn't have to be that way.
Some kids would just decide they don't want to cycle anymore
down that particular street.
Well, the process of retelling the narrative
to a clinician would allow an extinction
of the fear response, right?
So a reduction in the heart rate,
a reduction in the narrowing of focus,
a reduction in all the things that we consider fear.
But a really good cognitive behavioral therapist
or somebody that understands the neuroscience
of fear and trauma would understand
that that's not sufficient.
That's what's really important is that this child,
this hypothetical child relearn a new narrative
that they don't just manage to bike to soccer practice
or manage to spend time with friends,
but that they actually start wiring
in new positive associations with biking to practice,
with playing soccer, with social events.
And this is the somewhat surprising feature of this
and that they link that back
to that early traumatic experience.
That it's not just that they're replacing
a bad experience and memory
with a good experience and memory,
but they're actually holding in mind
in these top-down narrative circuits, if you will,
they're holding in mind,
ah, I'm not just biking to soccer practice.
I'm actually biking to soccer practice
and I'm enjoying it despite the fact
that I was in a bad car accident,
despite the fact that two months ago or two years ago
or maybe even 10 years ago, I couldn't even leave my room
or I didn't want to associate with anybody.
So the building up of the positive associations are key.
And the linking of those positive associations
with the earlier traumatic event is key
for the following reason.
The top-down circuitry from the prefrontal cortex
to this threat reflex circuit
is not like the other connections in that circuit.
The other connections in that circuit
are what we call glutamatergic and excitatory.
They are all about activating other neurons,
like a chain reaction, one neuron activates,
the next activates, the next dominoes falling.
These top-down circuits that feed into the threat reflex
and all its parts is what we call inhibitory.
It tends to prevent activation of those given circuitries.
It tends to prevent activation of the threat reflex.
So it's acting as a break.
And so when we think of positive experiences
being associated with what was previously
a negative experience,
we're not talking about forgetting
that the car accident was horrible
or forgetting that the assault was absolutely dreadful.
We're talking about attaching a new positive memory
to the circuitry so that the previous fear response
is far less likely to occur and that it remains extinguished.
So just to make sure this is absolutely clear,
there's a first step which involves retelling
and reliving in order to extinguish the fear and the trauma,
to reduce the amplitude of the response.
Then there's a need to replace or attach positive experiences
to the earlier what would be traumatic response.
The extinction has to go first.
This is key.
You can't simply say, oh, you know,
the car accident was actually a good thing
because I stayed home a lot that year and I got to study.
You can tell yourself that, and that could also be true,
but that won't necessarily and probably won't
eliminate the fear or the traumatic association
of the car accident.
And again, I'm using car accident as a general example
or generic example here.
Okay, so there's a three-part process.
One, diminish the old experience
through repetitive narrative.
And almost inevitably, the initial repetition of that
is going to be very high amplitude and quite troubling,
but over time it will reduce, right?
You're turning the terrible, really upsetting story
into a terrible, boring story.
That's the extinction process.
Then there's a relearning of a new narrative
that includes some sort of sense of reward,
and that sense of reward has to be tacked back
onto the traumatic event
or what was previously a traumatic event.
And that is all through narrative.
It's all through cognition.
And I think this is a very important point.
Oftentimes I think we tend to undervalue
the importance of rationalization
and of story and of narrative.
But the prefrontal cortex is this amazing capacity
of our brain real estate to create meaning,
to attach meaning and purpose to things
that otherwise are just reflexive.
And in the example of an ice bath,
it might be a little trivial.
In the example of the kid with the car accident,
it becomes a little more relevant.
And in the example of things like people surviving genocide
or attaching stories of great victory
to what were previously thought of as stories of great loss
of time, of people, of any number of things,
that process of narrative is one of the major ways
that the human brain rewires itself.
Narrative should not be undervalued
as a tool for relieving fear and trauma.
In fact, narrative is one of the best and most potent ways
that we can rewire our fear circuitry
and that indeed we can form completely new relationships
to things over time.
So basically narrative should not be undervalued
as a tool to rewire our nervous system,
but it has to be engaged in the correct sequence.
And that correct sequence is first extinction,
then relearning a new narrative with positive associations
and attaching those positive associations
to the formerly traumatic or fearful event.
Now I mentioned prolonged exposure therapy,
cognitive processing and cognitive behavioral therapy.
For those of you that are seeking relief
from fear and traumatic events,
you can look up licensed clinicians that can carry out
those one or several of those types of therapies.
I get a lot of questions about other forms of therapy.
One of the ones that comes up a lot is so-called EMDR,
eye movement desensitization reprocessing
developed by Francine Shapiro in the 80s.
Eye movement desensitization reprocessing
involves moving the eyes side to side
while recounting a traumatic or fearful narrative,
typically with a clinician present.
Why would that work?
Well, basically when I first heard about EMDR
from my stance as a vision scientist,
I thought the whole thing was kind of crazy
and half-baked frankly.
I heard these theories that,
oh, it recreates the eye movements
in rapid eye movement sleep or REM sleep.
And that's completely false.
It does not.
I heard the argument EMDR activates
both sides of the brain,
which I guess hypothetically
was thought to be important somehow.
And frankly, there's no evidence whatsoever
that EMDR activates both sides of the brain
in a way that's beneficial.
I mean, by looking from side to side,
just because of the way that binocular visual circuits
are organized, it will do that.
But it never made any sense to me why EMDR would work
until several years ago when I saw,
because I reviewed no fewer than five papers,
some in animal models, others in humans,
looking at lateral eye movements,
meaning eye movements from side to side with eyes open,
not eyes up or down.
And what was observed in these experiments,
in all of them actually,
all five of those papers was a dramatic reduction
in the activation and actually an inhibition,
a suppression of the fear or threat reflex circuitry,
which was a jaw dropper for me.
I thought, wow, actually it was a jaw dropper,
eye widener for me.
I thought, oh my goodness,
maybe this EMDR stuff works according to some mechanism
and maybe this is the mechanism.
And indeed many laboratories, not mine,
but many laboratories are now pursuing that idea
and it's looking very likely.
Why would that happen?
Well, just very briefly,
a lateralized eye movements of the sort that I'm describing
and I'm moving my hand like this,
but I'll just do it with my eyes,
even though it's a little embarrassing to do that
because I know it looks strange,
I don't mind because I'm doing EMDR
and EMDR reduces activation of the amygdala
and related circuitries, which reduces anxiety
and reduces the amplitude of the threat reflex,
reduces sympathetic autonomic arousal.
In other words, we feel calmer or we feel less alert,
less stressed when moving our eyes from side to side.
And the just so story about this
is that these are the sorts of eye movements that we do
when we are ambulating, moving through space,
through some sort of self-generated motion.
And one can make up a pretty reasonable story
in the evolutionary context or ethological context
that forward movement and fear
are generally incompatible with one another.
That generally a fear response
involves a freezing or a retreating.
Some people will advance,
but that's usually a trained advance in response to fear.
So first responders and so forth.
Most people freeze or retreat when they're afraid.
Forward movement generates these eye movements.
It does seem to suppress activation of this threat reflex
and the amygdala in particular.
So for the many EMDR practitioners out there,
these papers, I think are a great celebration.
And I think there is now increasing excitement about EMDR
in the psychiatric and psychological community
for its utility for treating fear, trauma, and PTSD.
However, I should point out that in discussing EMDR
with various colleagues of mine at Stanford and elsewhere,
I was told that EMDR has been shown to be beneficial
in particular for single event type traumas
or fearful experiences,
not so much for relieving the trauma
or feelings of fear associated, for instance,
with an entire bad marriage or an entire childhood,
but more for single, more acute events
that can be described within a very kind of brief narrative.
Brief, not necessarily in time, but that the car accident,
the bad interaction with another individual,
the assault, God forbid, these sorts of things.
And I realize we're down in the weeds of topics
that are unpleasant.
And so I have great sensitivity to that,
but I think it's also important that we be realistic
about the kinds of things that traumatize people.
So is EMDR useful?
Well, it seems like it works for these single event
or kind of constrained event type traumas
that people can describe while moving their eyes
from side to side, generally in the presence of a clinician.
However, if we think back to the model of how you extinguish
and then replace a trauma or fear,
remember you have to diminish the old experience,
the amplitude of that, that's the extinguish portion.
Then you need to relearn a new narrative
and attach reward to the old traumatic event.
EMDR only really taps into the extinction
of the physiological response to the old experience.
I'm sure that there are EMDR practitioners out there
that are thinking about the attaching
of the new narrative and reward,
but there I've heard less
and I've seen fewer peer-reviewed papers on that.
So let's think about this logically.
Let's say, and indeed it's the case,
that sitting down in a chair,
moving eyes side to side deliberately
for some period of time reduces activation
of the threat reflex.
I, or the patient in this case,
recites or repeats over and over the traumatic event
or the fearful event.
I'm doing that in the presence
of a lower amplitude response.
Remember back to where we talked about
how the retelling works best
if the first time it's done,
there's a huge amplitude response.
And then with each successive repeat,
that response, the threat response gets lower and lower.
With EMDR, you're sort of short circuiting.
You're kind of sneaking around the corner
of that high amplitude response.
And so it's taking a somewhat different approach
of trying to extinguish the bad feelings
in body and mind associated with an experience
by reducing the physiological response.
So it's somewhat different.
And at least to my knowledge,
and EMDR practitioners, please correct me,
but at least to my knowledge,
there isn't an active component to EMDR
of relearning a new narrative and attaching reward.
Now, reward and attaching reward
requires a somewhat high amplitude sympathetic arousal.
It requires a feeling of a victory, which is arousal.
Okay, it's positive arousal, not negative arousal,
but it is arousal.
So I'm not focusing on this
to try and diminish the potential impact of EMDR.
I know many people have achieved great relief from EMDR,
but it doesn't tap into all the aspects
of the extinction and relearning
that we talked about previously.
And therefore, I think on its own,
at least in many cases,
is unlikely to be a complete therapy for fear and trauma.
If there are people out there
who've had terrific results with EMDR,
please let us know in the comments section.
On YouTube would be the ideal place.
If you've had bad experiences with EMDR
or it didn't work for you, also let us know.
I think that EMDR practitioners,
like most practitioners
in the psychiatric and psychological space,
are eager to expand their practices
in order to make them more effective
rather than clinging ardently to something
that perhaps is incomplete
or that doesn't work for certain individuals.
So I think they would appreciate that feedback, as would I.
So as I mentioned before,
most of these therapies are done in conjunction
with a skilled, often one would hope, credentialed clinician.
There are many people, however,
that don't have access to that
or who are working through stuff.
They have things in their past
that are very uncomfortable to them.
And I'm aware that many people
are working through those things through journaling,
through talking to a friend,
through any number of different
sort of non-traditional approaches.
One thing that really pertains to everybody
who's working through fear and trauma of any kind
is the importance of social connection
as it relates to the chemical systems
and the neural circuits associated with fear and trauma.
And this is a emerging literature in neuroscience
that is really a beautiful one
because it's a very conserved biology.
We see it, believe it or not, in flies, in fruit flies,
a commonly used model system,
in mice and indeed in humans as well.
And this is the work of David Anderson's group at Caltech,
of again, of Dr. Ressler's group at Harvard Medical
and elsewhere, of course.
And this is the work as it relates to tachykinin.
Tachykinin is a very interesting molecule in our brain.
And it turns out that tachykinin is activated in neurons
of what's called the central amygdala
and some nearby structures.
So really smack dab within the middle of this threat reflex
very soon after some traumatic or fear inducing event occurs
and it actually sets in motion a number of other things,
including changes in gene expression and potentiation,
meaning long-term potentiation,
activation of NMDA receptors and so on in the circuits
that reinforce that fearful or traumatic experience.
Now, what's interesting about tachykinin
is also that it's been shown to lead to
low to moderate levels of anxiety
and even kind of aggression, irritability.
Tachykinin levels are further increased
by social isolation.
And that social isolation is oftentimes
what can exacerbate preexisting traumas or fearful events.
And in a kind of beautiful symmetry
to that kind of dark and depressing story,
social connection with people that we trust,
and it doesn't have to be direct physical contact,
but just social connection,
conversing with, sharing a meal with,
it could be physical touch if that's appropriate,
those sorts of connections actually serve to reduce
the effectiveness or even the levels of tachykinin.
So the important point here is that
trauma is traumatic in and of itself.
Fearful events are hard in and of themselves.
And if people are working through them,
either through clinical work or through individual work,
it is important.
And ideally one would still be trying to access
social connection outside of that specific work
related to the trauma.
Now, it doesn't necessarily have to be outside of that.
For instance, if you are,
you have a good relationship with a clinician or therapist
to the point where there's real trust
and you feel a social connection with them, wonderful.
But for many people,
they have a more transactional relationship
to the EMDR practitioner or to their therapist,
or they're working through things on their own.
And it's really important to understand
that regular social connection,
trusting social connection of any kind
is going to be very beneficial for that process.
And so this is not kind of just hand wavy,
new agey stuff like, oh, you need social connection.
There's a actual neurochemical basis for social isolation
that has an amplifying effect on fear and trauma.
And there is a neurochemical basis for the relief
from fear and trauma and isolation.
And in the ideal circumstance,
one is working through these traumas and fears
very intensely in a very dedicated way,
but then is also engaging in the sorts of social interactions
that are going to diminish the amount of tachykinin
and going to suppress those very circuits
that would otherwise be amplified.
So next I'd like to talk about some really interesting
and almost kind of eerie scientific findings.
And that's the transgenerational passage of trauma
or predisposition to fear and trauma.
This is a scientific literature that's been debated
many times over the last really 50 plus years,
but in more recent studies have really proven
that we as humans have the capacity to inherit
a predisposition to trauma or fear.
Now that doesn't necessarily mean
that we will become traumatized or experience extreme fear
just because our parents or grandparents experienced that.
It's a predisposition, it's a bias.
Let me explain the papers that focus on this
for a little bit, and then we'll talk about
what this means for each of us.
One of the most important papers in this area
comes to us from someone I mentioned earlier,
Dr. Kerry Ressler at Harvard.
And the title of the paper is
Association of FKB5 Polymorphisms and Childhood Abuse
with Risk of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms
in Adults.
And there are other papers as well.
Another one from the Ressler Lab,
first author Brian Dias, D-I-A-S,
Parental Olfactory Experience Influences Behavior
and Neural Structure in Subsequent Generations.
I'm going to summarize these papers
and their general contour and papers related to them,
although feel free to look up the papers I just described.
We will provide a link to them in the caption
if you'd like to go further.
But basically these explorations involve
looking at the histories of human individuals
who had trauma or abuse of some kind in their childhood,
and then looking at the likelihood of fear
and PTSD type symptomology in their offspring.
And essentially what they identified is that indeed,
if you had a parent,
and there does seem to be a kind of a bias toward an effect
where if the father had abuse
and it's severe abuse or moderate abuse,
that abuse causes a change in his genetics, in his sperm,
that can be passed on to offspring,
such that the offspring have a lower threshold
to develop trauma or extreme fear
to certain types of events.
Now, what's important to point out is that predisposition
or bias is not necessarily to the same sorts of events.
It's not that the abuse itself gets passed
from one generation to the next.
It's a predisposition.
And the title of that paper mentioned FKB5,
excuse me, FKBP5 polymorphisms.
And the FKBP5 polymorphism maps
to a location in the genome that's associated
with the so-called glucocorticoid system
with cortisol release.
So the predisposition that one might inherit
from having a parent, father or mother,
but stronger tendency to inherit it from the father,
who experienced abuse,
is one in which the glucocorticoid system,
the cortisol system and that HPA axis
that we talked about before,
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis,
is sensitized or reactive in a way
that sets a lower threshold to become traumatized
or very afraid of certain types of events.
But it's not unique to the specific type of abuse
that the parent experienced.
Now, this is really, really important
because a lot of times out there,
I will hear that there's passage
or transgenerational passage of actual trauma,
the specific trauma.
Now, that could be through narrative telling.
If somebody is exposed to a lot of narrative
about their parents' trauma in one form or another,
it may be that they start to internalize
some of that trauma.
And there could be,
because we obviously can't rule it out,
there could be some other signatures
of prior specific traumas they get passed on to offspring.
But more likely, and certainly what these data
about these polymorphisms point to,
is that what gets passed on is a propensity
for the threat reflex to get activated
and attached to a wider variety
or to less intense types of inputs and experiences.
And the important point to take away from this
is that it's not some magical, mysterious,
and mystical thing that's being transplanted
from parent to child.
It's a gene or it's a modification in a set of genes
that gives a heightened level of responsivity
to fearful type events,
or even a heightened level of responsivity
such that things that wouldn't be fear-inducing
or trauma-inducing to certain individuals
can trigger fear and trauma in these children
that inherit this particular gene.
Now, that doesn't necessarily mean that they are fated
to forever be traumatized or live in fear.
That's simply not the case.
It's just a genetic predisposition.
Regardless of whether or not you had a parent or parents
that were traumatized or not,
there's no evidence, at least as far as I'm aware,
that the treatments for trauma should be any different.
As far as I know, there aren't gene therapies
currently aimed at these particular variants
like FKBP5 and so forth
that could reverse those particular genetic underpinnings
of the trauma predisposition.
So this transgenerational passage of trauma,
I think is extremely interesting in large part
because it brings us back to this idea
that the threat reflex is part of a larger sensory system.
Normally we think of seeing as a sensory system
or hearing as a sensory system,
but the threat detection and threat learning system,
the fear learning system is in many ways a sensory system.
It's just a sensory system that is very generic
in its response.
That generic response again is good
because it allows for flexibility,
but it's bad because it reduces specificity, right?
We can essentially become fearful or traumatized by anything
if the circuit gets activated
and these particular children inherit a predisposition
for more things and less intense things to traumatize them.
In a few minutes, we are going to discuss
some of the behavioral treatments,
including some really new exciting protocols
for dealing with fear and trauma.
But for a few minutes,
I'd like to discuss some of the drug treatments
that are starting to emerge as potential therapeutics,
in particular for PTSD.
The two drug treatments I'd like to focus on
are ketamine assisted psychotherapy
and MDMA assisted psychotherapy.
Currently ketamine assisted psychotherapy is legal.
It is approved provided it is prescribed
by a board certified physician in the United States.
I'm not certain about other areas of the world.
MDMA, also sometimes called ecstasy therapy
is in clinical trials in the US,
it is still an illegal drug to possess or to sell.
So I want to be very clear about that.
However, MDMA is being explored as a potential therapeutic
for PTSD and other forms of trauma.
And of course, ketamine and MDMA
are also both being explored for chronic depression,
eating disorders and a number of other psychiatric disorders.
But for the moment, I would just like to touch on
ketamine and MDMA as they relate to the fear circuitry
and trauma circuitry that we've described
in the early part of the episode and throughout the episode,
because I think that in viewing them through that lens,
we can gain some additional insight
into how they might be providing the sorts of relief
that some of the early clinical studies
are starting to point to.
Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic.
That's right, it's a dissociative anesthetic.
Its main function is to create a state of dissociation.
And I've never taken ketamine personally,
so I can't describe the experience of it.
But a colleague of mine in psychiatry
shared their experience with a patient's experience of it
as making that patient feel as if quote,
they were getting out of the cockpit of a plane,
but that they were observing themselves doing it.
And this was of course,
during a approved therapeutic session
that they were doing this.
And they were in some sort of intense visualization
about a traumatic experience.
They were describing some of their depressive symptoms
as well as the trauma.
And the narrative that they basically created
or took away from this, and that was relayed to me,
was one in which the patient felt like
they were in their own body,
but they were also viewing their own body from the outside.
So dissociative, in other words.
Again, I've never had this experience.
Some of you may have with ketamine or through other means,
but we might want to just take a moment
and think about what ketamine actually does
and what dissociation actually does
at the level of neural circuits.
And for that, we can look to this really beautiful paper
that was published by my colleagues,
Karl Deisseroth in psychiatry,
Robert Malenka also in psychiatry,
Legion Lowe also at Stanford.
They paired up or teamed up rather
to explore how systemic ketamine
adjust circuitries in the brain.
And what they discovered was that
it changes the rhythm of cortical activity
in certain layers of the cortex.
The cortex is like a layered sandwich.
The cortex of course, being the outside of the brain.
And there was a particular rhythm,
a one to three Hertz rhythm.
One to three Hertz just means a particular frequency
of electrical activity.
In this case, in these layer five neurons
of retrosplenial cortex.
So you don't need to know much about retrosplenial cortex
or one to three Hertz rhythms.
I think the important thing to just take away from this
is that there is now starting to be an understanding
of how drugs like ketamine work
to create this subjective experience
that this patient and other patients describe
as dissociation.
You know, dissociation in its essence
is really about not feeling what's happening.
It's about viewing what's happening
from a different perspective than what normally
one would view that experience from.
And so if we kind of plug that general notion
of dissociation and ketamine induced dissociation
into the circuit that we talked about before
where we have this threat reflex involved in the amygdala,
these outputs for freezing or for reward in the accumbens,
and we've got this prefrontal narrative coming down
as top-down processing,
it brings us right to that prefrontal cortical input
to the threat system and that narrative.
What seems to be the case in my review
of the paper I just described plus a review
on how ketamine assisted trauma relief might work
is that it somehow allows the patient, the individual,
to recount their trauma while feeling either none
or a very different set of emotional experiences
that they experienced in the actual trauma
or fearful experience.
So it's a remapping of new onto old,
new meaning new feelings onto old feelings
while staying in the exact same narrative.
So it's a little bit like EMDR
of suppressing the threat reflex,
but it seems to bring in a replacement of previous
emotional experiences and sensations in the body
with new ones.
And so in that way, we can sort of view,
or we can try and view ketamine assisted psychotherapy
for the treatment of trauma as bringing together
the three elements that we talked about before.
You want to diminish the intensity,
the potency of the old original trauma experience
or fear experience.
So that seems to be accomplished through this dissociation
and maybe through the kind of anesthetic component.
So it's a reduction in pain in the body,
a dissociation, a kind of observing of the self
that leads to the extinction of the trauma and the fear.
But then there also seems to be an automatic
or kind of built in relearning of a new narrative
and new set of experiences,
which is the next step that we described earlier.
So it's an intriguing therapy.
It's one that's really catching on.
And there are many, many clinics around the US
that are now doing it.
Whether or not it turns out to be the ultimate treatment
for trauma and for fear isn't clear.
My colleagues in psychiatry tell me that that's unlikely,
although it does seem to be beneficial
for a number of people,
especially people that are experiencing trauma
or have existing traumas and fear
that are coupled with depressive symptoms
because the data on ketamine and depression
seems to be quite strong.
So now let's talk about MDMA.
MDMA, also sometimes called ecstasy or molly
in its recreational form, is a powerful synthetic drug
that at least as far as we know,
creates a state in the brain and body
that is unlike any other chemical state
in the brain and body that's normally experienced.
What do I mean by that?
Well, we have several neuromodulator systems in our body.
Neuromodulators are chemicals that change the likelihood
that certain neural circuits will be active,
meaning they can make it very likely
that certain circuits will be active
and make it very unlikely
that other neural circuits will be active.
Good examples of neuromodulators are dopamine,
serotonin, acetylcholine, norepinephrine.
These tend to work on different systems
in the brain and body,
but they tend to be activated more or less in parallel.
You can have dopamine released in your brain
and also norepinephrine.
You can have serotonin released in your brain
and also acetylcholine.
So it's not an all or none kind of thing,
but the degrees to which these things are activated
tends to vary.
And there is a little bit of a seesaw type phenomenon
with dopamine and serotonin.
Dopamine most commonly associated
with activating neural circuits related to motivation,
craving, and reward.
And serotonin more typically activated
in response to situations or conditions
in which we are very happy and content with what we have.
So dopamine is more about pursuing and seeking.
Serotonin is more about kind of a pleasure and satisfaction
with resources that we have in our immediate sphere.
They don't tend to,
serotonin doesn't tend to place the brain and body
into a mode of action quite as much as dopamine does,
more or less.
MDMA is a unique compound
in that it leads to very large increases
in the amount of both dopamine and serotonin
in the brain and body simultaneously.
And that's a unique circumstance
that is just simply not seen under normal conditions.
From a subjective standpoint,
people under the influence of MDMA
in the therapeutic setting tend to report immense feelings
of connection or resonance with people
or even things with music, with objects.
Certainly if it's being done in conjunction
with a family member or a partner
or with a therapist,
they will feel extremely connected to that person.
They'll feel a very close understanding and association
oftentimes that goes beyond words.
There is a chemical reason for that.
It turns out that MDMA causes massive release of oxytocin,
this neuropeptide that's associated with pair bonding
and with bonding generally.
The oxytocin system and the serotonin system
are closely linked to one another in the brain and body.
And they tend to be co-released often at the same times
and by the same sorts of events.
So MDMA is one mechanism by which oxytocin is released
in these massive amounts.
And I should just relay some of the levels of oxytocin
because they're really quite striking
gives a kind of a more vivid picture
of why it is the MDMA would make people feel
so associated in a positive way
with the various things that are happening to them
while they're under the influence of the drug.
So the paper related to this that I'd like to highlight
is in the journal, Psychoneuroendocrinology.
The title of the paper is plasma oxytocin concentrations
following MDMA or intranasal oxytocin in humans.
And just remarkably,
MDMA increased plasma oxytocin levels
to 83.7, this is an average,
83.7 picograms per milliliter,
about 90 to 120 minutes into the MDMA session
compared to a typical level of 18.6.
So this is a massive increase in oxytocin.
And I think that massive increase in oxytocin
is part of the reason why people have these feelings
of close resonance and association.
Now, the dopamine increases
are generally what lead to the feelings of euphoria
inside of the MDMA session.
And then the serotonin increases, it is thought,
are what lead to the feelings of safety and comfort.
So again, a very unusual chemical cocktail
that would never be seen, at least not at this amplitude,
under any normal conditions
outside of an MDMA clinical psychotherapeutic session.
Why would this state of mind and body
be potentially useful for the treatment of trauma?
Well, indeed it is revealing itself to be useful
for the treatment of trauma.
Again, these are legal clinical trials
where people are doing this and discovering this.
What it seems to allow is a very fast relearning
or new associations to be tacked on
to the previously traumatic experience.
So again, it brings us back to the same model
of how people extinguish fears and traumas
and replace them with new experiences
when there is no drug treatment involved.
There needs to be a diminishing of the old experience,
meaning an extinction,
and then a relearning of a new narrative.
What the chemical milieu of MDMA seems to be doing
is creating an opportunity for all that to happen very fast
without the need for many repetitions of the original trauma
and reliving of the original trauma,
probably because the reliving of it
inside of one of these MDMA sessions is very acute,
very intense, plus it seems to be offering the opportunity
to extinguish and rewrite in or write in a new narrative
associated with that trauma very quickly as well.
So what this means is that treatments like MDMA
that are under investigation in these clinical trials
are unlikely to be magic potions, if you will,
that allow access to a particular process
that would otherwise not be accessible.
It's more that the typical process of trauma
and fear reduction that's carried out
in things like prolonged exposure,
cognitive processing, cognitive behavioral therapy
seems to be compacted into a much shorter session,
and that session is performed at a much higher intensity,
higher intensity because the chemical milieu of the brain
is completely different.
I mean, the experience of MDMA is one in which
people have a very heightened sense of euphoria,
a very heightened sense of connection,
so those positive experiences are essentially prime
to be written in and over the traumatic experience,
and because of the high levels of serotonin in the system
and probably oxytocin as well,
there's a safety that's written into the situation
that allows people to lean into perhaps narratives
or components of narratives
that they would otherwise be holding back from.
So these are powerful compounds,
and I think the future of MDMA-assisted psychotherapy
for trauma in particular is holding great promise.
As of now, meaning at the time of the recording
of this podcast, again, I want to reiterate
that these are clinical trials that are being done legally.
These drugs are still illegal to possess or sell
outside of clinical trials.
Doing this sort of thing is punishable,
but it does seem that the FDA
and some of the related bodies
that control these sorts of things
are eyes open to this stuff,
and I think it's very likely in the next few years,
things like MDMA and certainly ketamine is already
in widespread use within the psychiatric community,
and I think we're going to be seeing a lot more of that.
One thing we have not touched on yet
is how do you know if you're traumatized?
How do you know if you have chronic fear
or a debilitating fear?
Much of the psychiatric community focuses
on how many other problems people might have,
trouble sleeping, trouble eating,
trouble maintaining quality work or schoolwork and so forth,
and all of those are certainly very valid criteria
and necessary criteria for determining
whether or not somebody meets clinical diagnosis or not,
but there's a biological component
that I think we can all assess for ourselves,
and that's one of interoceptive versus exteroceptive balance
and that sounds confusing,
but it's actually really easy to understand.
We can focus our perception on the external world,
events going on around us beyond the confines of our skin
or within the confines of our skin.
A focus and a perception on the external world
is what's called exteroception,
and a focus on what's happening inside us
is interoception,
and we have the capacity to build mental appraisal
into that, right?
I can, for instance, stop for a moment
and assess how my stomach feels, how hungry I feel,
how quick my heart is beating.
Some people, by the way, are much better at sensing
whether or not their heart is beating at a particular rate
and others not so much.
Some people can actually count their heartbeats
without having to take their pulse
by placing pressure on their wrist or their neck.
Some people can't.
In other words, some people have very high interoceptive
awareness and other people less so.
This whole business of fear and trauma
relates to taking external experiences
and funneling those experiences into this thing
that I'm calling a threat reflex or the fear circuitry.
A recent paper published in the journal Science,
so absolutely spectacular journal, Science, Nature, and Cell
being the apex journals of scientific publishing,
gets at this issue of where in our mind
and how do we assess
whether or not what we are feeling internally
is reasonable given what's going on externally.
And it's a really fascinating study.
I'm just going to highlight a little bit of it for you,
and then I'll touch on some of the relevant aspects
and how that can be adopted into a practice
to assess and reduce fear and anxiety.
The title of this paper,
published just a few weeks ago in Science,
is Fear Balance is Maintained by Bodily Feedback
to the Insular Cortex in Mice.
We've not talked too much about the insula,
also called the insular cortex.
This is a brain area that my lab has worked on
and other labs have worked on.
It's a brain area that has within it a map
of our internal interoceptive landscape.
It's a map of our internal bodily sensations.
It's a really interesting structure.
So the way this study was carried out
is that subjects were taught or conditioned
to a particular danger signal
through repeated presentation of a sound with a foot shock.
So there's a sound and there's a foot shock.
And as you know from our earlier discussion
about Pavlovian learning,
conditioned stimuli and unconditioned stimuli,
eventually the sound alone comes to evoke the fear response.
And that's just classical conditioning.
The insula is this brain area
that's associated with determining
whether or not one's internal sensations,
gut, heart, lungs, et cetera,
are reasonable or not given the external circumstances.
It can even measure or is associated with our understanding
of what are called atrial baroreceptors.
These are blood pressure sensors.
So believe it or not, when your pulse rate increases
or you feel like you're stressed out,
your atrial baroreceptors are sending a signal
to your insular cortex and your insular cortex is saying,
wow, I'm really stressed out.
My blood pressure is up.
You don't actually have to measure your blood pressure
with a cuff.
Your insula is doing it for you.
It's not getting a quantitative readout,
but it's getting a qualitative readout.
The main effect of inhibiting
or reducing the activity of the insula
was that the intensity of an outside world experience
led to a range of different internal effects.
In other words, for most people,
a mild shock would induce a mild increase in heart rate,
a mild increase in blood pressure,
whereas an intense shock to the skin
would lead to a big increase in heart rate
and a big increase in blood pressure.
Turns out the insula is important
for establishing that match of intensity.
And when the insula is inhibited,
what ends up happening is that a mild shock
can create a big increase in blood pressure.
And that can be maintained such that
anything that's paired with that shock,
like a bell or a tone,
would lead to a big increase in blood pressure.
You've probably seen examples of this in the real world.
Maybe this is even you.
Some people are very jumpy in response
to just even small changes in their environment.
So if somebody is working and you walk in and you say hello,
and they'll go, and they're kind of, they're jumpy.
They have a low threshold to a big anxiety
or a fear response.
Other people are really calm.
I recall my bulldog, unfortunately, he passed away.
But before he passed away,
if you walked in the room and you said,
hey Costello, he might turn his eyes in your direction.
He had a very high threshold to respond.
He was pretty low anxiety animal.
A lot of people are like that.
You come up behind someone and you say, hello,
and they just turn around real slow,
or they might just turn around at normal speed and say hello,
whereas other people would jump out of their seat.
The insula seems to be involved in calibrating how big
or how high amplitude a given physiological response is.
So it's pairing the internal landscape
with the external world.
And this might seem like just a mechanistic,
but non-actionable point.
But what you'll see from the next study
that I'm going to describe is that recalibrating
the relationship between outside events
and internal responses, which is the job of the insula,
is actually something that's under our control.
And through a very simple, very short protocol,
we can actually recalibrate that system so much so
that we can potentially reduce the amount of fear
and trauma that we experience in response to a memory
or to a real event.
And the entire process can occur very quickly.
So I'm really excited to tell you about this next study
for a number of reasons.
First of all, it's extremely recent.
Second of all, it's very well grounded
in our current understanding of the mechanisms
of stress, trauma, and PTSD,
and unlearning of stress, trauma, and PTSD.
And third, it points to a actionable protocol
that while certainly is not the only approach
that I think people could or should take
for fear, trauma, and PTSD is one that I think
we are going to see implemented
into the clinical setting very soon
if it's not happening already.
Now, there's a fourth reason I'm very interested in it,
which is that my lab works on stress, stress relief,
and tools for managing sleep and improving focus, et cetera.
And one of the hallmarks of the studies
we've been doing lately is very brief
five minute a day interventions of the sort
that was used in this particular study,
although I should emphasize I had nothing to do
with this particular study.
Now, this particular study was carried out
in an animal model in mice.
The work in my laboratory focuses on human subjects,
but the similarities of the stress system,
at least at the level that it was explored in this study,
I think have great relevance,
maybe even direct relevance to humans.
So the title of this study is repeated exposure
with short-term behavioral stress
resolves preexisting stress-induced
depressive-like behavior in mice.
Again, this study was in mice.
And basically what they did is they stressed out mice,
got them depressed, and you actually can do that in a mouse
using a restraint protocol.
And that's a long lasting restraint protocol
of 15 minutes or more.
Mice don't like it.
You do it often enough.
They stop working so hard in their life,
in their mouse life to gain food, to gain mates.
They show depressive symptoms in a number of levels.
They show elevated glucocorticoids.
You see the same thing in humans.
Chronic stress in humans lasting weeks or more
does the same exact thing.
So again, a very close match here
in terms of mechanism overall.
And then what they did was a very counterintuitive thing.
Rather than give these animals stress relief
at the level of reducing their anxiety
with benzodiazepines
or giving them a nice little mouse vacation
or enhanced or enriched environment,
things that have been done in a lot of previous studies,
what they did is they subjected them to five minutes a day
of intense stress, but only five minutes a day.
And what they found was miraculously,
but also very convincingly,
daily short bouts of intense stress
actually undid, reversed the effects of chronic stress.
And it did this at the level of glucocorticoids,
of hormones, of neurotransmitters,
and a number of other different mechanisms.
Now, I find this very exciting for a number of reasons,
but in particular, because my laboratory
in collaboration with David Spiegel's laboratory,
our associate chair of psychiatry at Stanford,
been exploring how five minute a day
respiration protocols can alleviate stress.
And while those data are not yet published,
they are at the stage
where I'm comfortable talking about them.
And we are seeing some very impressive
and significant effects on stress reduction,
not just from respiration protocols
that allow people to calm themselves,
but also respiration protocols
that bring people into a heightened state
of autonomic sympathetic arousal, AKA stress.
As my colleague, Dr. David Spiegel,
he's an MD, psychiatrist, and PhD, likes to say,
when it comes to trauma, anxiety, and PTSD,
and the treatment of trauma, anxiety, and PTSD,
it's not just the state that you are in or that you go into,
it's how you got there
and whether or not you had anything to do with it.
And this brings us right back to those top-down mechanisms
and the narrative around
what we are experiencing internally.
So let's zoom out and I'll explain how this works
and what to do about it.
We have this brain structure called the insula.
We talked about the insula a few minutes ago.
The insula is calibrating how we feel internally
versus what's going on externally.
It's involved in setting
whether or not what we are feeling is appropriate
given what's happening.
We have a system that can generate threat responses.
And in the case of trauma, PTSD, and extreme stress,
chronic stress, that system gets ramped up
so that it takes very little, maybe even just a memory
or maybe even an association that we're not even aware of,
you know, a location triggers something,
we're not even aware of it,
and we start experiencing that symptomology.
How do we recalibrate the system?
Well, most of the approaches that are out there
involving drug treatments,
typical drug treatments would involve
suppressing the level of internal arousal,
just trying to bring that down.
Now, some of those drug treatments work,
but oftentimes they don't.
And if you think about it,
it's probably not surprising that they don't
because by taking a drug that just lowers your anxiety,
overall, you're creating a different sort of
miscalibration of the system.
So what we've been doing in human subjects
is having them do either breathing protocols that calm them,
and I'll explain what that is in a moment,
or doing breathing protocols
that increase their level of autonomic arousal
and seeing how that impacts their response to stress overall
not just during that particular breathing protocol.
So the calming protocol that we use
involves these physiological sighs.
I've talked about these previously
on the podcast and elsewhere,
but if you just need a reminder,
if you haven't heard about it,
there's a pattern of breathing that we all do in sleep
when our carbon dioxide levels in our bloodstream
get too high, and we do this when we get claustrophobic,
meaning we do it reflexively,
and that's a double inhale through the nose
followed by a long exhale.
So it's,
and yes, the inhales should be through the nose,
and yes, the exhales should be done
through the mouth, ideally.
So it's a big filling of the lungs
through two breaths back to back inhales.
Even if you can only sneak in a little air
on that second one, no talking if you're going to do it right
and then a long exhale, which allows you to offload
a lot of carbon dioxide in the exhale.
And we have people doing that in real time,
anytime they experience stress,
but the particular breathing protocol
that we've been giving human subjects
is for them to do the repeated, what we call cyclic sighing.
So double inhale, exhale, double inhale, exhale,
double inhale, exhale, repeatedly for five minutes,
which is actually a pretty long time to repeat that,
but you can do it pretty slowly.
And people report and the data point to the fact
that it's very calming.
People feel more relaxed afterwards,
and that relaxation wicks out
into other aspects of their life.
Now, we did not look at stress and trauma in that condition.
We also have another condition
where people do what's called cyclic hyperventilation,
which is very different
and creates a very different internal state
and is somewhat stressful.
It's five minutes a day of stress,
much like the study that I just described,
and it involves basically doing this,
what I'll do in a moment,
for five minutes, which is hyperventilating,
which is, ah, ah, ah, ah,
but not continuously for the five minutes,
because many people would pass out
or feel extremely uncomfortable.
It involves inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, very deep,
inhale through the nose, exhale through the mouth,
and then every 25 or 30 breaths or so,
doing a full exhale and holding one's breath,
lungs empty for about 25, maybe 30, maybe even 60 seconds,
and then continuing until five minutes is up.
Subjects report, and our data indicate
that people feel a heightened level of autonomic arousal.
In fact, I can feel it right now,
even from that very brief
cyclic hyperventilation bout I just did.
You feel a heating up.
You feel a, some people will perspire.
Some people get wide-eyed.
Some people feel agitated.
That's adrenaline being released into your system.
Now, I'm not suggesting everyone run out and do this,
and if you have a predisposition to panic attack
or anxiety attacks, please don't do this,
because it is very stimulating
and can trigger those sorts of attacks,
but this five-minute-a-day protocol
of cyclic hyperventilation does lead to big increases
in autonomic arousal, so it's stressful, in air quotes,
but to bring us back to the,
my colleague David Spiegel's quote,
it really was him that said it, not me.
It's not just about the state that you're in.
It's about the state that you're in,
plus how you got there
and whether or not you directed entry into that state,
and that point of that one directs their own entry
into a state deliberately is really key
and I think has an important implications
for whether or not there's stress relief
and fear relief and trauma relief
from bringing oneself into a state
of increased autonomic arousal.
Why?
Because of the way that that fear
and trauma circuitry is organized.
If you recall, it's got these components
of how external events can trigger
an internal stress response and fear response
and trauma response,
but there's that top-down prefrontal component
that can inhibit certain aspects
of that fear and threat circuitry.
Now, earlier we were talking about that prefrontal circuit
being engaged through narrative,
through self-directed deliberate narrative.
It's the person deliberately retelling the story.
Here, we're talking about a deliberate reactivation
of the sensations in the body.
So where I think this is all going,
meaning where my laboratory and the Spiegel Laboratory
and other laboratories out there are taking this,
is you can imagine a very brief five minutes a day,
two weeks was the time that they did this
for five minutes a day for two weeks,
intervention in which people with the support
of a clinician, we would hope,
would deliberately induce a physiological state
that's very stressful, right?
Not shying away from the stress response,
but increasing their own stress response deliberately,
and maybe in conjunction with recounting
the traumatic or fearful circumstance.
This is far and away different
than the kind of state of mind and body
that would come about in a ketamine-assisted,
trauma-induced psychotherapy session,
or a MDMA-assisted trauma psychotherapy session,
or in a purely narrative-based psychotherapy session
aimed at alleviating fear or trauma.
The reason I like these sorts of interventions is that,
A, they are very low cost or even zero cost, right?
One could, you could imagine doing this while journaling
or while recounting a particular experience.
Again, they're very compact.
Five minutes a day for two weeks
is what was done in this particular mouse study.
We don't know if that translates directly
to the human study or not.
What was interesting is that
if they used a longer daily bouts of stress,
like 15 minutes a day, that actually exacerbated the trauma
and exacerbated the fear.
So one has to be very careful.
Stress and deliberate entry into stress
and self-stressing are very potent tools.
They're very sharp blades that it does appear,
or it's likely can help alleviate trauma and fear.
But how long to do this, exactly what the protocol should be
is still something that needs to be cultivated.
I know there are going to be people out there
that nonetheless are going to want to experiment
with some of this.
I will say that I do not think it matters
how one gets into that stressed state,
provided it is self-directed.
And that therefore could be cold shower.
It could be ice bath.
It could be anything that induces an acute,
meaning a sudden onset of adrenaline and is self-directed.
That's really the key feature here.
So I'm very excited about these data,
both the five-minute intervention data
from the animal study,
the work that's ongoing in my laboratory
and Dr. Spiegel's laboratory,
and the work that's being done on the insula,
because I think what we're starting to see now
is a picture of fear and trauma and PTSD
that has this sensory component,
what's happening in the world around us,
this internal interoceptive component,
how appropriate are the signals
that are occurring in my body?
I mean, let's face it,
if you almost get hit by a car
and your heart rate is 140 beats per second,
and that lasts for a little while,
and you're stressed out,
and you don't get the best night's sleep,
that's pretty normal.
That means you have a healthy fear system.
If that persists and you're dealing with a lot of issues
a week later, six weeks later, two years later,
then it's moved into the realm of trauma and PTSD.
So we need to always be taking into account
the different components of the circuitry.
I do think that deliberate self-directed entry
into these short bouts of stress
is a very promising approach,
and it's one that if people are going to experiment,
I just, again, want to caution people with anxiety
or panic disorders, be very cautious,
probably don't do it.
Ideally, you would do this in conjunction
with support from a clinician,
but I'm also aware that there are a lot of people out there
that are dealing with trauma
and dealing with post-traumatic stress of various kinds,
and that they're desperate for various
self-directed intervention approaches.
So just very briefly,
I want to touch on some of the lifestyle
and supplementation factors that can impact things
like fear and trauma and getting over fear and trauma.
To make a long story short,
there are many things that we all can and should do
to support our overall mental and physical health.
And these are the foundational elements
of quality nutrition, what that means to you,
quality sleep on a regular basis,
ample sleep on a regular basis.
We have an episode on how to master sleep.
In fact, we have four episodes
that you can go to Hubermanlab.com or elsewhere
and scroll down, and you can find those episodes
in order to get your sleep really dialed in, as they say.
If you're sleeping regularly and for sufficient duration,
all of the systems of your fear circuitry
are going to function better,
mainly because the autonomic nervous system
becomes very dysregulated
when we are not getting good sleep on a regular basis.
Dysregulated means that out of nowhere,
we can have a higher propensity
to have sympathetic activation,
or we can feel really tired and wired.
That seesaw that I described earlier
of alertness and calmness,
of sympathetic and parasympathetic,
in that analogy, we can imagine that seesaw has a hinge,
and that hinge can neither be too tight nor too loose.
If it's too tight, you can get locked
into chronic activation of alertness or chronic fatigue.
If it's too loose, you're bouncing all over the place
and you might be a little tired and wired one moment,
and then really hyper alert.
Sleep resets that balance and resets that hinge
to the appropriate tightness, if you will,
so that all these circuits,
and not just the circuits related to fear,
but also the circuits related to cognition, clear thinking,
to be able to spell out very clear, detailed narratives,
to feel like you are in control,
you are deliberately bringing yourself into these protocols,
if that's what you intend to use.
All of that functions much better
when you're sleeping well and eating well.
We talked about social connection.
Those are all indirect supports of trauma relief
and of getting over fear, but they are essential.
I think of them sort of like the tide,
when the tide is high enough, a boat can leave harbor,
and if the tide is not high enough,
then that boat is going to be stranded on shore.
And in this analogy, the boat stranded on shore
is your attempt or anybody's attempt
to try and work through something.
Very hard to do when we're sleep deprived,
very hard to do when we're not fed enough
or fed the proper foods for you,
and that's a highly individual thing.
And social connection, as we talked about earlier,
creates a general sense of support
for the ability to move through things,
but also chemical support
at the level of suppressing tachykinin, okay?
So those foundational elements are absolutely key,
but they are indirect.
I just want to briefly mention a few of the things
that some people find great benefit from
in the supplementation realm
as it relates to anxiety, stress, fear, and PTSD.
But I want to point out that, again,
these are somewhat indirect in their support,
and most of them focus on reducing anxiety overall.
The two that I want to focus on
are two that I've never talked about on this podcast before
because I've done podcasts before
on stress and managing stress in the kind of shorter term.
So we've talked about Ashwagandha in a previous podcast.
Check out the podcast on stress
if you're interested in how that might be relevant
as well as other tools.
But the two are interesting ones.
The first one is saffron, of all things,
but there are 12 studies, believe it or not,
that orally ingested saffron at 30 milligrams
seems to be a reliable dose for reducing anxiety
on the standard inventories,
the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale,
for those of you that want to know.
And these are significant effects,
and these were carried out in both male and female subjects.
Here, I'm only referring to human studies.
Several of these were double-blind studies.
There's a meta-analysis of the positive effects,
meaning anxiolytic effects,
anxiety-reducing effects, that is, of things like saffron.
Definitely have to check with your doctor,
make sure it's right for you.
But they're fairly impressive effects
when you really think about it,
given that these are legal over-the-counter substances.
Again, check with a doctor.
The other one is inositol.
Inositol has been shown to create a very notable decrease
in anxiety symptoms.
It's a fairly high dose that's used,
but believe it or not, the potency of this effect
is on par with many of the prescription antidepressants.
That's pretty impressive.
These studies, again, are double-blind studies
that all showed decreases in anxiety.
These were done in males and females.
The age range is very broad, which is great,
18 all the way up to 64 across the studies that I looked at.
One of the more important things is that
the dosages are quite high,
18 grams of inositol taken for a full month.
And it does take some time for these symptoms of anxiety
to be improved.
The low dose range was about 12 grams of inositol,
so as high as 18, as low as 12 grams.
But then again, pretty impressive results
considering that these are over-the-counter
supplement compounds.
There's even some evidence, I should just mention,
that the inositol is also used for things like
obsessive compulsive disorder.
We will do a full episode on OCD in the future.
You can count on that.
But in the meantime, inositol does seem to have
some positive effects on anxiety,
and therefore it might provide a supportive indirect effect
for people that are trying to work through trauma and PTSD.
Now, the question is, when would you take it?
Well, by the logic of what we spelled out today,
you probably would not want to take it during a session
or prior to a session where you were trying to
amplify the intensity of an experience
and the recounting of an experience
in efforts to eventually extinguish that experience.
Because if you put a drug or a compound of any kind,
prescription drug or supplement of any kind,
into your system, you are essentially short-circuiting
the extinguishing effect, right?
So you could imagine doing this outside of that session
as a way to kind of bring your system
back to baseline, perhaps.
So if you're going to use these sorts of things,
you want to think about them logically.
And this also really points to the fact that
many of the things that people are doing out there
to self-medicate, overuse of alcohol or other substances
to try and calm themselves,
because they have fear, anxiety, and PTSD,
are actually driving that fear, anxiety, and PTSD
deeper into their system,
or at least is not allowing it to relieve itself
through any attempts to recount or replay
and using these top-down narrative circuits
or other approaches.
And the last compound I want to mention
is a particularly interesting one
because it's neither an anxiolytic,
nor is it something that increases
overall levels of stress and alertness,
but it has some kind of MDMA-ish like contour to it.
It does not produce, as far as we know,
the same mental effects or physical effects as MDMA
by any stretch,
but that's the substance that I'm referring to,
rather, is kava.
Kava has been shown in eight studies
to have a very potent effect on reducing anxiety.
But what's interesting about kava
is that kava functions by increasing GABA,
this inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.
Remember, GABA is the inhibitory neurotransmitter
that is used, that's employed by the very neurons
in the prefrontal cortex
that serve to inhibit the threat reflex.
So it seems to increase GABA,
but it also increases dopamine.
And that's a somewhat unusual compound.
I'm not aware of many compounds
that simultaneously increase GABA and increase dopamine.
And as you recall, that threat reflex has outputs
that tap into the dopamine system.
Now, that's a big leap to go from a compound
that increases GABA and dopamine
and look at a circuit spelled out on paper in front of us
and say, oh, well, there's GABA and dopamine in this circuit
and therefore this is a good compound to take.
But the effects of kava in human studies
are pretty interesting as it relates to anxiety,
stress, PTSD, and fear.
I'm not going to summarize all of these
because there are eight studies that I'm aware of,
but I'll just mention again,
these are double-blind studies.
So the trial design is solid.
The age ranges are anywhere from 18 to 64,
which is a nice broad age range.
The number of subjects is quite high, both men and women,
no signs of hepatotoxic signals,
so meaning a liver toxicity,
although of course, check with your doctor.
But what was interesting is that after a period
of about three weeks of treatment
with anywhere from 150 milligrams
of what are called active kava lactones.
Okay, so there are dosages that relate to that kava.
So 100 milligrams of extract of kava
is a kind of a reasonable typical dose in these studies,
but that spells out to a certain amount of kava lactone.
So you have to kind of boil down
to what is the appropriate dosage.
And it turns out it's extremely broad.
You'll see evidence of 50 milligrams.
You'll see evidence of 300 milligrams.
It's kind of all over the place,
but each of these studies alone and together
point to the fact that kava does seem to produce
a very potent anxiolytic and general kind of improvement
in depressive symptoms and reduction
in generalized anxiety across the board.
So it's an interesting compound.
I've never actually tried any of the compounds
I just mentioned, kava, saffron, or anisotol.
So I can't report on them personally.
I just know that a number of listeners of this podcast
are interested in supplements
and legal over-the-counter approaches
to their biology and psychology.
And so that's why I mentioned them.
Those were the three for which I found
the most convincing evidence
and the largest bulk of evidence.
So if you're interested in exploring those,
proceed with caution, but they do seem quite interesting.
So today we've reviewed a large amount of information
about the biology of pathways in the brain and body
that underlie the fear response
and that give rise to chronic fear
and in some cases to trauma and PTSD.
We also touched on a large variety of approaches
to dealing with fear, trauma, and PTSD
that currently exist in the clinical landscape out there.
I also touched on some of the emerging themes.
For instance, this short five-minute a day
deliberate self-directed stress of any kind
through respiration or other approaches
of increasing adrenaline as an approach
that might be viable, I should emphasize might be viable
for enhancing the speed or the potency of treatments
to reduce fear or eliminate trauma.
Most important I believe is to understand
and really think about the logical structure
of the circuits that underlie fear and PTSD.
Because in doing that, each of us, all of us
can think about what sorts of treatments and approaches
make the most sense for them.
I also hope that it will help people
lean into certain practices involving re-exposure,
provided that's done in a supportive environment,
re-exposure to a given traumatic event
in an attempt to extinguish that.
Obviously you want to do that safely,
meaning psychologically safely and physically safely.
There are great practitioners out there
that can help you with that work.
There are also a number of people out there,
I am certain, that are carrying certain traumas
or certain fears that they would like to alleviate
that are not in the extreme clinical realm.
And that's the reason why I touched on a number of things,
including some self-directed practices
that might be useful and reasonable for them to explore.
I realize we covered a lot of information today.
If you're enjoying and or learning from this podcast
and you're not traumatized
by the amount of information covered,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity
to leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have suggestions of guests
you'd like us to host on the podcast,
or you have topics that you'd like us to cover,
please put that in the comment section on YouTube.
Also, please check out the sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of this episode.
That's a terrific way to support us.
We also have a Patreon, it's patreon.com
slash Andrew Huberman,
and there you can support this podcast
at any level that you like.
On this podcast episode
and in many previous podcast episodes,
I describe supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary
and perhaps aren't right for everybody,
many people derive great benefit from supplements.
It is important, however,
that if you're going to use supplements,
that they be a very high quality
and that you can trust that the amounts of supplement
listed on the supplement bottle
are actually what's contained in the bottle.
It's a serious issue with a lot of supplements out there.
For that reason, we partner with Thorne, T-H-O-R-I-N-E,
because Thorne has the highest levels of stringency
with respect to the quality of their supplements
and the amounts of the supplements listed on the bottle
are actually what are contained in the bottle.
They've partnered with all the major sports teams
as well as the Mayo Clinic,
so we have a very high degree of trust with Thorne products.
If you want to see the Thorne products that I take,
you can go to thorne.com
slash the letter U slash Huberman,
and there you can see the supplements that I take.
You can get 20% off any of those supplements,
and if you navigate deeper into the Thorne site
through that portal, thorne.com slash U slash Huberman,
you can also get 20% off any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
If you're not already following Huberman Lab
on Twitter and Instagram,
there I do short neuroscience tutorials,
I offer a lot of tools,
oftentimes that don't overlap
with the content of the podcast.
And last but not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
I'll see you in the next one.